Microorganisms and mircoswimmers are usually dispersed in an aqueous solution at room temperature and therefore experience thermal fluctuations which give rise to a diffusive component in their self-propelled swimming motion. In addition, the self-propulsion mechanism is typically noisy in itself [2], for instance, due to environmental factors or intrinsic stochasticity of the mechanisms creating self-propulsion. These “active fluctuations” exhibit two essential features. First, a certain persistence in the direction of driving over length- and timescales comparable to observational scales. Second, an inherent nonequilibrium character as a consequence of permanently converting and dissipating energy in order to fuel selfpropulsion. Interestingly, similar active fluctuations with the same characteristics can be observed in a complementary class of active matter systems, namely, a passive colloidal “tracer” particle which is suspended in an aqueous solution of active swimmers. The collisions with the active particles in the environment entail directional persistence and nonequilibrium features in the motion of the passive tracer particle [22–24]. The sketch in Fig. 1 illustrates these two types of active particle systems.

Despite the inherent nonequilibrium properties of active matter systems, they appear to bear striking similarities to equilibrium systems [21,25–27], for instance, the dynamics of individual active particles at large scales often looks like passive Brownian diffusion [3] (i.e., at scales beyond at least the “persistence length” of the particle motion). In connection with the ongoing attempts to describe active matter systems by thermodynamic (-like) theories, this observation raises the important question, “How far from equilibrium is active matter?” [28,29]. More specifically, the questions are (i) in which respects do emergent properties of active systems resemble the thermodynamics of thermal equilibrium systems, (ii) in which respects do they not, and (iii) how do these deviations manifest themselves in observables describing the thermodynamic character of the active matter system, like, e.g., the entropy production? 

Such questions should be answered independently of the specific microscopic processes creating the active driving because, while these processes maintain the active particle system out of equilibrium, they contain little or no information on whether the emergent system behaviorappears equilibriumlike or not. It is, for instance, of little relevance for the system properties emerging on the coarsegrained scale of particle trajectories (e.g., the “diffusion” of active particles) and their similarities or dissimilarities to thermal equilibrium, if an active particle is self-propelled by chemical processes occurring at its surface or by a beating flagellum. In this spirit, here we address the above questions from a fundamental nonequilibrium statistical mechanics viewpoint by developing a trajectorywise thermodynamic description of active particle systems as a natural generalization of stochastic energetics [30,31] and thermodynamics [32–36] of passive particles in a purely thermal environment. In particular, we study the breakdown of time-reversal symmetry in the motion of particles which are driven by thermal and active fluctuations. We quantify the associated irreversibility of individual particle trajectories as a measure for nonequilibrium by comparing the probability of a specific particle trajectory to occur forward in time to that of observing its time-reversed counterpart. We link the corresponding probability ratio to functionals over the forward trajectory and provide a thermodynamic interpretation of the resulting extensive quantities in terms of entropy production and mutual information. 

In the case of passive particles in contact with a single purely thermal bath, the path probability ratio is a wellestablished fundamental concept in stochastic thermodynamics for assessing irreversibility [32–35]. It is known to provide relations between thermodynamic quantities, such as entropy production, work, or heat, and dynamical properties encoded in path probability ratios. Many such relations have been found over the last two decades [33,34,37–39], which, in their integrated forms, typically yield refinements of the second law of thermodynamics[33,38,40]. In particular, the fluctuation theorem for the total entropy production of a passive particle in a thermal environment reinforces the fundamental interpretation of entropy as a measure of irreversibility (we give a briefsummary of the results most relevant to our present work in Sec. III). In the presence of active fluctuations, however, the identification of dissipated heat and entropy production is less straightforward and is connected to the problem of how to calculate and interpret the path probability ratio in a physically meaningful way [41,42].

In the present work, we analyze the path probability ratio based on particle trajectories, i.e., from the evolution of the particle positions in time, without explicitly modeling the (system-specific) microscopic processes behind the active fluctuations. This approach allows for deriving general results on the nonequilibrium character and thermodynamic content of the dynamical behavior emerging in active matter systems independent of the specific processes generating the active fluctuations but with the caveat that dissipation and irreversibility occurring in these processes cannot be assessed [41]. The derived quantitative irreversibility and thermodynamic measures are easily accessible in standard experiments, e.g., from recording particle trajectories using video microscopy. In order to account for the active fluctuations, which either stem from an active bath	 the (passive) particle is dispersed in or from active selfpropulsion (see Fig. 1 and Sec. IVA for specific example of both cases), without resolving the microscopic processes that govern the interactions between active and passiveparticles or drive self-propulsion, we follow the common approach to include stochastic “active forces” in the equations of motion of the individual particle of interest (see, e.g., Refs. [2,5] and references therein). When calculating the path probabilities, we treat these active nonequilibrium forces in the same way as thermal equilibrium noise, namely, as a “bath” the particle is exposed to with unknown microscopic details but known statistical properties (which are correlated in time and break detailed balance [43]). Our main results following this approach and their implications are briefly summarized in the next section.




